---
title: "The Sword of Truth book series is an objectivist obsession"
pubDate: 2025-01-18
description: "I'm thoroughly impressed by what Perplexity.ai is doing here"
author: "Perplexity AI (pro mode)"
tags: ["blog", "opinion", "sword of truth"]
---

## The Sword of Truth: A Cautionary Tale of Objectivist Obsession

Terry Goodkind's Sword of Truth series stands as a prime example of how an author's philosophical obsessions can derail
an otherwise promising fantasy epic. Goodkind's infatuation with Ayn Rand's Objectivism permeates the series,
transforming it from a potentially engaging fantasy narrative into a heavy-handed philosophical treatise that ultimately
undermines its own storytelling.

### Philosophical Preaching Over Plot

The most glaring issue with the Sword of Truth series is Goodkind's tendency to prioritize Objectivist preaching over
coherent plot development. As the series progresses, characters increasingly become mouthpieces for Randian philosophy,
delivering long-winded speeches that grind the narrative to a halt[2]. This penchant for philosophical diatribes reaches
its apex in later books, where entire chapters are devoted to characters expounding on Objectivist principles, often at
the expense of advancing the story or developing characters in meaningful ways[5].

### One-Dimensional Characters

Goodkind's adherence to Objectivism results in characters that are more philosophical constructs than fully realized
individuals. The protagonist, Richard Rahl, evolves into an idealized Randian hero â€“ infallible, omniscient, and morally
superior to all around him[9]. This characterization strips Richard of complexity and relatability, turning him into a
mere vessel for Goodkind's philosophical musings. Other characters suffer similar fates, becoming either sycophantic
followers of Richard's Objectivist wisdom or cartoonishly evil antagonists who embody everything Rand's philosophy
opposes[7].

### Simplistic Moral Dichotomies

The Sword of Truth series presents a world of stark moral absolutes that align neatly with Objectivist principles. This
black-and-white morality leaves little room for nuance or ethical complexity. Goodkind's villains are often thinly
veiled caricatures of collectivist ideologies, while his heroes embody Randian ideals of individualism and rational
self-interest[12]. This simplistic approach to morality not only feels reductive but also robs the narrative of
potential depth and complexity.

### Repetitive Storytelling

As Goodkind becomes increasingly focused on promoting Objectivist ideas, the series falls into a repetitive pattern.
Each book follows a similar formula: Richard faces a new threat, delivers lengthy speeches on individual rights and
rational self-interest, and ultimately triumphs through his unwavering adherence to Objectivist principles[6]. This
predictability saps the series of tension and undermines any sense of genuine character growth or narrative progression.

### Misogyny and Sexual Violence

Perhaps most troublingly, Goodkind's interpretation of Rand's philosophy leads to a disturbing portrayal of women and
sexuality in the series. Female characters are often subjected to graphic sexual violence, which is presented as a
necessary plot device or a means of character development[2]. This trend reflects a misguided attempt to explore Randian
ideas of dominance and submission, resulting in a series that is both misogynistic and gratuitously violent.

### Conclusion

While the Sword of Truth series may have begun with promise, Goodkind's obsession with Ayn Rand's Objectivism ultimately
proves to be its undoing. The author's insistence on using his fantasy world as a vehicle for Randian philosophy results
in a series that sacrifices narrative coherence, character development, and ethical nuance in favor of heavy-handed
ideological preaching. The end result is a cautionary tale of how an author's philosophical fixations can overshadow and
ultimately destroy the very story they set out to tell.

Citations: [1] https://www.infinityplus.co.uk/nonfiction/goodkind.htm [2]
https://www.reddit.com/r/Fantasy/comments/u09ye0/everything_wrong_with_terry_goodkinds_sword_of/ [3]
https://doom-metal.com/phpbb2/viewtopic.php?t=1504 [4] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Terry_Goodkind [5]
http://goodkindsucks.blogspot.com/2018/09/terry-goodkind-fantasy-writer.html [6]
https://booksharkblog.wordpress.com/2017/03/23/rank-the-series-the-sword-of-truth-by-terry-goodkind/ [7]
https://martinstellinga.com/reviews/the-sword-of-truth-fascist-misogynistic-and-racist/ [8]
https://www.atlassociety.org/post/the-randian-fantasies-of-terry-goodkind [9]
https://houseofgeekery.com/2020/10/30/in-memoriam-terry-goodkind-1948-2020/ [10]
https://www.reddit.com/r/Fantasy/comments/16q24v/is_sword_of_truth_worth_reading/ [11]
https://www.bhagwad.com/blog/2010/book-reviews/complete-sword-of-truth-series-book-review.html/ [12]
https://www.dickwizardry.com/articles/sword-of-truth-series-ranked [13] https://fantasyliterature.com/reviews/confessor/
[14] https://www.sffchronicles.com/threads/565712/ [15]
https://fantasybookcritic.blogspot.com/2007/12/interview-with-terry-goodkind.html [16]
https://www.reddit.com/r/SwordOfTruth/comments/9qsgq0/goodkinds_inspiration/ [17] https://www.jstor.org/stable/41717248
[18] https://app.thestorygraph.com/book_reviews/7ed3643d-b4fe-4773-a1c2-9b01430c98b7 [19]
https://theobjectivestandard.com/2020/02/how-terry-goodkinds-sword-of-truth-saved-my-life/ [20]
https://www.atlassociety.org/post/fiction-under-the-influence-ayn-rands-literary-legacy [21]
https://www.reddit.com/r/Fantasy/comments/ys8v1/for_those_who_have_read_both_authors_how_familiar/
